COMPUTER 
ORGANIZATION AND ARCHITECTURE
Dr. Bore Gowda S B
Additional Professor
Dept. of ECE
MIT, Manipal
Fundamentals of Computer Architecture
Introduction
❑Why Computer Organization and Architecture?
• Because you use it everyday
• Because you will likely use it for the rest of your life
• It focuses on the interface between hardware and software
• It emphasizes the structure and behavior of the system
• You can build your own computing device as per your requirement
• Knowing how the hardware operates makes you a better coder
• For a hardware engineer, designing the parts is a basic requirement
Dr. Bore Gowda S B, Additional Professor, Dept. of ECE, MIT, Manipal
2
Introduction
❑What is Computer Architecture?
❑It refers to system attributes that are visible to the software programmer and have a direct 
influence on a program's logical execution, such as 
o the number of bits needed to represent distinct types of data, 
o the computer's instruction set, 
o the technique for addressing memory, 
o the method used for input and output, and so on.
❑Computer architecture is a group of rules, orders, and processes that describe the functionality 
and performance of computer systems. 
❑Basically, it deals with the operational behaviour of computer systems.
❑It involves decisions about the organization of the hardware, such as:
o the instruction set architecture
o the data path design
o the control unit design. 
❑Computer architecture is concerned with optimizing the performance of a computer system and 
ensuring that it can execute instructions quickly and efficiently.
Dr. Bore Gowda S B, Additional Professor, Dept. of ECE, MIT, Manipal
3
Introduction
❑What is Computer Organisation?
❑Computer organisation is also known as Microarchitecture. 
❑What does microarchitecture include? 
▪Instruction implementation: How instructions are carried out
▪Data management: How data is handled
▪Control flow management: How control flow is managed
▪Techniques: Techniques such as single-cycle, multicycle, pipelined, superscalar, and out-of-order 
processing
❑It provides deep knowledge of functionality, structuring, internal working, and implementation 
of a computer system. 
❑It refers to the operational units and their interconnections that realize the architectural 
specifications
❑Examples of organizational attributes include those hardware details transparent to the 
programmer, such as
✓Control signals,
✓Interfaces between the computer and peripherals
✓Memory technology
Dr. Bore Gowda S B, Additional Professor, Dept. of ECE, MIT, Manipal
4
Introduction
❑Hlojk[p’kl’
Dr. Bore Gowda S B, Additional Professor, Dept. of ECE, MIT, Manipal
5
S.No
Computer Architecture
Computer Organization
1.
Explain what a computer does.
Explain how a computer actually does it.
2.
Majorly focus on the functional behaviour of 
computer systems.
Majorly focus on the structural relationship and 
deep knowledge of the internal working of a system.
3.
Deal with high-level design matters.
Deal with low-level design matters.
4.
It comes before computer organisation.
It comes after the architecture part.
5.
It is also called instruction set architecture.
It is also called microarchitecture.
6.
It covers logical functions, such as registers, 
data types, instruction sets, and addressing 
modes.
It covers physical units like peripherals, circuit 
designs, and adders.
7.
They coordinate between the hardware and 
software of the system.
They manage the portion of the network in a 
system.
Basic components of a computer
❑To execute instructions, the computer 
performs the following steps:
▪the control unit reads or fetches an instruction 
from memory and decodes are translates it 
▪for arthritic or logic type instructions, the 
control unit generates enables signals for the 
ALU to perform the required operations
▪for input and output(I/O) instructions, the 
control unit generates enable signals for the IO 
either to input data from or output data to 
external devices
Dr. Bore Gowda S B, Additional Professor, Dept. of ECE, MIT, Manipal
6
• CPU = program control unit + ALU + registers
• Memory = RAM + ROM + ERPROM etc+ secondary memory
Von-Neumann computer architecture
❑Von-Neumann proposed his computer architecture 
design in 1945 which was later known as Von-
Neumann Architecture. 
❑The major components of it are:
✓a Control Unit
✓Arithmetic and Logical Memory Unit (ALU), 
✓Registers and Inputs/Outputs.
❑It is based on the stored-program computer concept, 
where instruction data and program data are stored 
in the same memory. 
❑This design is still used in most computers produced 
today.
❑A Von Neumann-based computer:
✓Uses a single processor
✓Uses one memory for both instructions and data.
✓Executes programs following the fetch-decode-execute cycle
Dr. Bore Gowda S B, Additional Professor, Dept. of ECE, MIT, Manipal
7
Harvard computer Architecture
❑Harvard Architecture is the computer 
architecture that contains separate storage 
and separate buses (signal path) for 
instruction and data. 
❑It was basically developed to overcome the 
bottleneck of Von Neumann’s Architecture. 
❑The main advantage of having separate buses 
for instruction and data is that the CPU can 
access instructions and read/write data at the 
same time. 
Dr. Bore Gowda S B, Additional Professor, Dept. of ECE, MIT, Manipal
8
Organization of Stored Program Computer System
❑Computer: device capable of processing information by executing a program consisting of several 
sequence of instructions stored in memory
❑This kind is called a stored program computer, because the instructions and data are held in the 
same memory
❑Instruction execution takes place within the CPU and is controlled by the control unit 
❑Control Unit
❑Control unit has to perform the following task to carry out the instruction execution process:
✓instruction interpretation 
▪Reads an instruction
▪recognizes the instruction operation
▪retrieves the required data
▪Perform desired operation by activating the ALU
✓instruction sequencing
▪Determines the address of the next instruction
▪ programs are executed in a strictly sequential fashion 
▪the next instruction to be executed stored in the consecutive memory locations
Dr. Bore Gowda S B, Additional Professor, Dept. of ECE, MIT, Manipal
9
Organization of Stored Program Computer System
❑Typical control Flow sequences - 
▪Branch instruction
▪Subroutine call
Dr. Bore Gowda S B, Additional Professor, Dept. of ECE, MIT, Manipal
10
Organization of Stored Program Computer System
❑CPU
▪includes set of high speed registers 
▪registers may hold data, temporary results or memory address when a computation is in progress
❑Common CPU registers
▪Program counter(PC): holds address of the instruction to be executed
▪Instruction register(IR): holds the instruction currently being executed 
▪Effective address register(EAR): holds the address of the data to be retrieved from the memory
❑Refer to as dedicated registers because they are available for the exclusive use of the control unit 
and cannot be accessed by a user program
❑Memory Unit
❑Divided into two sections: Primary memory and Secondary memory
❑Primary memory
❑designed using semiconductor technology 
❑it is of two types: read write memory and read only memory
Dr. Bore Gowda S B, Additional Professor, Dept. of ECE, MIT, Manipal
11
Organization of Stored Program Computer System
❑Memory Unit
❑Divided into two sections: Primary memory and Secondary memory
❑Primary memory
▪designed using semiconductor technology 
▪It is of two types: read write memory(RWM) and read only memory(ROM)
▪RWM AND ROM are random access memory
❑Secondary memory
▪Used to store large amount of data 
▪Examples: magnetic disks and tapes etc.
❑I/O device : allow user to communicate with the computer
▪To facilitate communication between the CPU and an IO device we need interface circuitry between 
them
❑System bus
▪The components of a stored program computer systems are connected to each other by a bus
▪three types of buses: address bus, data bus and control bus
Dr. Bore Gowda S B, Additional Professor, Dept. of ECE, MIT, Manipal
12
Computer structure(Organization)
❑Classified into following three groups 
❖General register-based processor
❖Accumulator based processor 
❖Stack based processor
Dr. Bore Gowda S B, Additional Professor, Dept. of ECE, MIT, Manipal
13
Computer structure(Organization)
❑General register-based processor
❑8 general registers : R0 through R7 can hold
▪Data
▪Memory addresses
▪Result of arithmetic or logic operation
❑Program counter: Holds address of the next 
instruction executed
❑Effective address register: Holds address of data 
to be retrieved from memory
❑Instruction register: Holds instruction currently 
being executed
❑Stack Pointer: Address of the top element of 
stack
❑F flag register: holds carry flag or zero flag
❑Support two- and three-address instructions
Dr. Bore Gowda S B, Additional Professor, Dept. of ECE, MIT, Manipal
14
Computer structure(Organization)
❑Accumulator based processor 
❑One of the operands is assumed to be 
held in the accumulator register (ACC) for 
arithmetic or logic operation 
❑results of all arithmetic and logic 
operations are routed to the ACC
❑one address instructions are very 
predominant in this organization
Dr. Bore Gowda S B, Additional Professor, Dept. of ECE, MIT, Manipal
15
Implementation of assignment statement D = A + B*C 
using different addressing instruction format
Computer structure(Organization)
❑Stack based processor
❑Stack
▪A stack is an ordered linear list in which all insertions and deletions are made at one end, 
called top. 
▪It uses Last In First Out (LIFO) principle
▪A register is used to store the address of the topmost element of the stack which is known 
as Stack Pointer(SP) 
▪The main two operations that are performed on the operands of the stack are: Push and 
Pop. 
▪These two operations are performed from one end only.
▪Push Operation: The operation of inserting an item onto a stack
▪Pop Operation: The operation of deleting an item onto a stack
Dr. Bore Gowda S B, Additional Professor, Dept. of ECE, MIT, Manipal
16
Introduction
❑Stack based processor
❑Stack
▪Applications:
✓Evaluation of mathematical expressions using Reverse Polish Notation.
✓To implement subroutine calls and returns
✓to pass parameters from a main program to a subroutine
✓to handle interrupts
✓To reverse a word. A given word is pushed to stack-letter by letter-and then popped out letters from 
the stack.
✓An undo mechanism in text editors; this operation is accomplished by keeping all text changes in a 
stack.
✓Backtracking: this is a process when it is required to access the most recent data element in a series 
of elements.
✓Language processing
✓space for parameters and local variables is created internally using a stack.
✓The compiler’s syntax check for matching braces is implemented by using stack.
Dr. Bore Gowda S B, Additional Professor, Dept. of ECE, MIT, Manipal
17
Computer structure(Organization)
❑Stack based processor
❑Stack
▪There are two types of stack organization which are used in the computer hardware:
▪Register stack: It is built using register
▪Memory stack: It is logical part of memory allocated as stack. The logically partitioned part of RAM 
is used to implement stack.
Dr. Bore Gowda S B, Additional Professor, Dept. of ECE, MIT, Manipal
18
Computer structure(Organization)
❑Stack based processor
❑
Register stack
▪The stack can be arranged as a set of memory words or 
registers. 
▪Each time an element is added (pushed), the stack pointer 
is incremented. 
▪When an element is removed (popped), the pointer is 
decremented.
▪Consider a 64-word register stack arranged as displayed in 
the figure. 
▪The stack pointer register includes a binary number, which 
is the address of the element present at the top of the 
stack.
▪Stack Pointer (SP): Points to the top of the stack.
▪Data Register (DR): Holds data being transferred.
▪Full: The stack is at maximum capacity and cannot hold 
more data (stack overflow).
▪Empty: The stack contains no data, and no items can be 
popped (stack underflow).
Dr. Bore Gowda S B, Additional Professor, Dept. of ECE, MIT, Manipal
19
Computer structure(Organization)
❑Stack based processor
❑Register stack
Dr. Bore Gowda S B, Additional Professor, Dept. of ECE, MIT, Manipal
20
Computer structure(Organization)
❑Stack based processor
❑Memory stack
▪can be implemented by configuring some portion 
of the read write memory 
▪one of the CPU registers called the stack pointer 
(SP) is used to hold the address of the most 
recently entered item onto the stack
▪The stack pointer register keeps track of the top of 
the stack, and elements are inserted or removed 
using this pointer.
▪The stack typically grows downwards, with new 
elements being pushed at lower memory 
addresses.
▪Program Counter (PC): Holds the address of the 
next instruction.
▪Address Register (AR): Stores memory addresses.
▪Stack Pointer (SP): Points to the top of the stack. 
▪Data Register (DR): Holds data being transferred.
Dr. Bore Gowda S B, Additional Professor, Dept. of ECE, MIT, Manipal
21
Computer structure(Organization)
❑Stack based processor
❑Memory stack
▪PUSH – writing onto the stack
▪Item can be inserted into the stack by executing 
PUSH instruction
▪POP – reading from the stack
▪Item can be removed from the stack by executing 
PUSH instruction
Dr. Bore Gowda S B, Additional Professor, Dept. of ECE, MIT, Manipal
22
Computer structure(Organization)
❑Stack based processor/Stack machine
❑Stack
▪In the event of binary arithmetic or logic operation, the 
first operand will be removed from the stack and held 
in register TEMP
▪the second operand will be directly routed from the 
stack to the right input of the ALU 
▪the result of the operation is stored in the top of the 
stack 
Dr. Bore Gowda S B, Additional Professor, Dept. of ECE, MIT, Manipal
23
Implementation of assignment statement D = A + B*C using 
stack machine instructions
Arithmetic Expression Evaluation
❑
Expression notation is a way to write mathematical expressions using operators and operands.
❑
The three most common types of expression notation are infix, prefix, and postfix. 
❑
Infix notation
✓The most common way to write mathematical expressions 
✓Operators are written between operands 
✓For example: A + B 
✓Parentheses are used to specify the order of operations 
✓This is the most natural way to write math, but it can be ambiguous 
❑
Prefix notation 
✓Also known as Polish notation (PN)
✓Operators are written before operands 
✓For example: + A B
✓Parentheses are not needed because the order of operations is clear 
✓This notation is easy for computers to read, but it can be unintuitive for humans
❑
Postfix notation 
✓Also known as Reverse Polish notation (RPN)
✓Operators are written after operands
✓For example: A B +
✓Parentheses are not needed because the order of operations is clear 
✓This notation is useful for analyzing and manipulating mathematical formulas
Dr. Bore Gowda S B, Additional Professor, Dept. of ECE, MIT, Manipal
24
Infix
Prefix
Postfix
A + B * C + D
+ + A * B C D
A B C * + D +
(A + B) * (C + D)
* + A B + C D
A B + C D + *
A * B + C * D
+ * A B * C D
A B * C D * +
A + B + C + D
+ + + A B C D
A B + C + D +
Arithmetic Expression Evaluation
❑Convert the following expressions into RPN:
1. X = (A + B + C) / (D –E * F)
2. X = A * B + C * D + E * F
3. X = (8 + 2 * 5) / (1 + 3 * 2 –4)
4. A = (B + C) * D –E 
5. [(A + B) * C + D ] / (E + F + G) 
Dr. Bore Gowda S B, Additional Professor, Dept. of ECE, MIT, Manipal
25
Evaluation of Postfix expression using stack
❑The evaluation rule/algorithm for the postfix expression is stated as:
1.
Read the expression from left to right.
2.
If it is an operand then push the element into the stack.
3.
If the element is an operator except NOT operator, pop the two operands from the stack and 
evaluate them with the read operator and push back the result of the evaluation into the 
stack. 
4.
If it is the NOT operator then pop one operand from the stack and then evaluate it and push 
back the result of the evaluation into the stack. 
5.
Repeat it till the end of stack.
Dr. Bore Gowda S B, Additional Professor, Dept. of ECE, MIT, Manipal
26
Introduction
❑Evaluate the postfix expression: 10 8 4 + * 6 3 / -
Dr. Bore Gowda S B, Additional Professor, Dept. of ECE, MIT, Manipal
27
Sr. no.
Expression
Stack
Operations
0
10
10
Push onto stack
1
8
10 8
Push onto stack
2
4
10 8 4
Push onto stack
3
+
10 12
Pop top two elements i.e. 8 and 4 from the stack, add them, then push 
the result onto stack
4
*
120
Pop top two elements i.e. 10 and 12 from the stack, multiply them, then 
push the result onto stack
5
6
120 6
Push onto stack
6
3
120 6 3
Push onto stack
7
/
120 2
Pop top two elements i.e. 6 and 3 from the stack, divide them, then push 
the result onto stack
8
-
118
Pop top two elements i.e. 120 and 2 from the stack, substract them, then 
push the result onto stack